Welcome to the Maximizing
OpenGL Performance session.
My name's John Stauffer.
I manage the OpenGL Engineering group.
So, let's talk a little bit about
what we want to learn today.
So what this session is,
it's a little bit
different than last year,
if anybody's gone to that session.
We tried to provide a little
bit different content here.
What this session is about is to
give you a hands-on session about
how to optimize your application.
So we're going to talk,
let's go down the subjects here.
We're going to introduce a
seed and tell you how to get
involved in the seeding program.
We're going to go over some key concepts,
some just high-level key
concepts that we're going to
want people to keep in mind.
Basic tips, and they are fairly basic.
Then we're going to get into
more detail about texture
uploading and vertex throughput.
So, the two main types of data
bandwidth primitives that
are going through the system,
being pixels and vertices.
We'll talk about how to
optimize that data throughput.
So, the OpenGL seed.
So, for some of you that
haven't seen this already,
we have an OpenGL seeding program
that we have announced for developers.
What this allows developers to
do is get early access to the
OpenGL framework and drivers.
And the benefit that brings to you is
it gives you early access to features,
bug fixes that you may have
that you're looking for,
profiling and tuning,
enhancements that may be coming.
But it gives you early access and
it gets you started developing
with the technology advanced.
So, we're going to talk about
the software updates and the
improvements we're making earlier.
You don't have to wait for a software
update before getting your hands
on it and then giving us feedback.
We want the feedback before
we release it the first time.
So the email address to get access
to that is openglseed@apple.com.
And what you'll want to do if you
want to become part of this program
is send an email to that address,
list who you are, why you want to become
active member of this seed,
and then that email will go to Apple.
And we'll sit down and see if we
can make you part of that program.
So, key concepts.
So this is kind of kicking off what
we're going to be doing in this session.
What we try to do when we analyze
problems at Apple is you kind of put
yourself in the mind of a detective,
right?
You've got to sit down,
you've got to gather clues,
you've got to try to come to a problem
with an open mind and make sure that
you are basing your decisions on facts,
clues that you're gathering.
So what we're going to try to do in
this session is give you the tools,
the ability to gather clues as to
where your performance is going to be.
So I'll be going through
some demonstrations of
going through the tools,
using the tools, analyzing some problems,
and seeing if we can
figure out what's going on.
So, what tools do we want to use?
So, for OpenGL applications,
clearly the OpenGL tools are an
important part of that process.
The OpenGL Profiler,
the OpenGL Driver Monitor,
but also Shark.
Shark is a very powerful tool and a
very important part of any attempt
to optimize your application.
So, some of the things that we
will do in this session.
So, one of the things that we will do
in this session then is start using
some OpenGL extensions to optimize
some of the problems we're finding.
And we'll go a little bit more in detail
about what extensions we're going to use,
but we're only going to
touch on a couple of them.
There's lots of extensions out there.
We'll touch on a couple.
So some basic tips.
I like to repeat these every year to make
sure that everyone is aware of these.
So calling GL flush is
something you rarely want to do.
You have to have a
good reason to call it.
There are a few cases out
there you'll want to call it,
but most people don't need it.
So if your application calls GL flush,
remove it.
If you call GL finish,
there's no reason to ever call GL finish.
Remove that.
Those are the first things you
want to do to an application.
So some OpenGL extensions.
We're going to be looking at
today our vertex buffer object,
and that's an extension for moving
vertex data through the system.
There's Apple Texture
Range and Apple Client Storage.
Those are extensions used for
optimizing texture upload.
So we'll be looking at those
for optimizing our data flow
in our applications today.
So the other important basic tip then
is to minimize your state changes.
State changes in OpenGL can be expensive.
And in fact, if you change state a lot,
you can be bottlenecked
simply by your state changes,
not by your data movement,
but by how you are managing your state.
If you're doing a lot of state
changes and little geometry,
little in the way of moving data,
then it's your state changes that
will be your predominant bottleneck.
Okay, so let's get into a demo here.
Switch to Demo Machine 1, please.
So what I've got here,
let me just run it and we'll take a look.
I've got a basic demo here showing
a mesh that's been texture mapped.
And I want to analyze
the performance of this.
So what we're going to do is
we're going to launch a few tools,
and we're going to see
what this shows us.
So the first tool I'm
going to launch is Shark.
Sharks fairly easy to use.
We're just going to launch it.
We're going to hit start to take
a sample for about five seconds.
We'll hit stop.
Let it generate the report.
So, looking at the top items here,
the first one we see is
it's often an interrupt.
Okay.
Well, that doesn't look good, right?
Down at the bottom here,
if people can see, we can see that we're
using about 39% of the CPU.
Well, let's say that this application,
I want to use 100% of the CPU.
I want it to be maximum performance.
So, why am I only using 30% of the CPU?
Why am I spending 30% of my application
time up here in an interrupt?
So, those are things I'll want to solve.
Thank you.
Looking down here,
I'm spending about 30% of
my time calculating a wave.
So let's launch some more tools to see
what other information we can gather.
So I'm going to launch
the OpenGL Profiler.
For those of you that
have never seen this tool,
there's a variety of ways to use it.
We'll get into a little
more detail later,
but right now I'm just going to attach
to this application while it's running.
Scroll down, find my demo app there.
I'm going to attach this tool to it.
Now,
once I'm attached to the OpenGL Profiler,
I can go up here and I can
pull down a statistics view.
I like to clear it,
just to make sure my stats are current.
Let me shrink it a little bit,
not to use too much screen space.
So, and I'll sort the times
based on percent time OpenGL.
So, looking at this,
there's a variety of information
we can pull out of this.
One is I can see that the top
OpenGL call that's consuming time in
this application is draw elements.
Using 97% of the GL time,
or looking at this column,
[Transcript missing]
And what the OpenGL Driver Monitor does,
it queries values directly out
of the kernel graphics driver.
And the parameter I have preset here
is a parameter called CPU Wait for GPU.
And what that means is that's the
amount of time the CPU is waiting for
the graphics processor to complete.
So, what we can see here,
let me set this to linear scale here,
and I'm using the percent numbers
on the right-hand side of the scale.
So what I can see is I'm spending
about 35% of my CPU time waiting
for the graphics processors.
So my CPU is just spin
looping in the driver,
waiting for something to happen
in the graphics processor.
Now,
That's approximately
correlating with Shark.
Shark is telling me that
something is spending about
30% of the time spin looping.
So I'm finding that these two tools
are showing me something here.
So now the trick is to find
out what's causing that.
So what you can do in the
Driver Monitor is you can
open this parameters window,
okay, and there's a variety of parameters
you can investigate that will give you
more resolution into these problems.
Anything here that starts with a,
that has the word "wait" in it is
something that's going to monitor
blocking points in the driver,
points at which the CPU is
waiting for the GPU.
The CPU wait for GPU is
the total of all of those.
So I'm looking at the total.
So now what I want to do is go
in and find the individual item
that's contributing to that.
Well it turns out,
since I set this up in advance,
I already know what it is.
It's CPU wait for free
OpenGL command buffers.
It's this command here.
So if I select that,
I can see the red line and the green
line are fairly close to each other.
So now the question is,
what's causing that?
Well,
that's where it gets a little tricky.
So let's look at the code and see if
we can analyze a little bit more detail
as to what could be causing that.
So let's quit this application and
let's open up my actual source code.
And
I'm going to... Someone was fortunate
enough to put comments in here labeling
everything that was bad in here.
So, one piece of information actually
that I forgot to mention was that
what's interesting about this
application is that it seems to be
locked in at 60 frames a second.
That's actually a pretty good clue to me
because I know that the refresh rate of
these monitors are 60 frames a second.
So, somehow what it tells me is that
it's likely that my refresh rate
in my demo is somehow locked to
the refresh rate of the display.
The one thing I know that can
do that is a CGL set parameter
setting the swap interval to 1.
And what that does is that
tells OpenGL to be tear-free.
Okay, so my OpenGL presentation
is going to be tear-free,
which is good in some cases,
but in this case I want
maximum performance.
I'm not looking for
tear-free presentation.
Okay,
so let's go ahead and comment that out,
because I'm just looking
to get maximum throughput.
So we commented out
the CGL set parameter.
We're going to close that window.
Now we're going to launch it again.
I'll let it compile.
OK, so we went from 60
frames a second to 118,
115.
Let's go ahead and take
another shark sample.
Take a look and see what that looks like.
Okay, so we can see that, in fact,
that was it, right?
So the top item, which was blocking spin
looping down in the kernel,
is now gone, and now we're spending,
instead of approximately 30% of
our CPU time calculating the wave,
we're spending 44.
Our performance got about twice as fast.
So, okay, so let's,
so we did what we needed to do there.
Now looking over at the driver monitor,
we can see that our CPU time
waiting for the GPU has dropped,
right?
It went from 30 plus
percent down to zero.
Okay, so now we believe that we are not
artificially blocking ourselves
against a graphics processor.
So let's back up a little bit now.
Let's go and review the tools.
I just gave you a quick example,
but let's go over the tools
in a little more detail.
So the OpenGL Driver Monitor is
a powerful tool that has
a number of features.
So the first screen you see in
the OpenGL Driver Monitor is
this screen right in the center.
And this screen gives you the
ability to launch or attach
to an OpenGL application.
So if I wanted to,
I could launch an application
simply by clicking the Add button,
adding an application to that list,
adding it, and then it'll show up here.
Now, the basic difference between adding
an application and attaching is
that if you launch an application,
I'm sorry, from launching an application
and attaching to an application,
is that when you launch it,
you can actually vary some of the startup
characteristics of the application.
So, for instance, I could vary the pixel
format that's used.
For those that program OpenGL,
you know that to create
an OpenGL context,
you have to create,
define a list of attributes for how
you want that context to be created.
So if you wanted to, in real time,
without recompiling your application,
you could come in here and vary
that pixel format attribute list.
So an example of that would be,
let's say I wanted to
change my depth size.
Let's say I wanted to make it a 16-bit
depth instead of a 32-bit depth,
for example.
Okay, so we're not going to use that,
but good to know.
Another item that is useful
for people is the ability to
emulate different hardware,
and the emulation is simply on the
return values OpenGL will give you.
In other words, if your application is
querying into OpenGL,
this will vary the return values
that OpenGL gives your application.
It will not actually vary the
behavior of a graphics driver.
So let's say that this
graphics device I have here,
I want it to behave like a RAGE 128.
If you look at what that does,
is it will vary these
return values from OpenGL.
Okay, so we have a list of extensions
that will simulate a RAGE 128.
We have a list of return parameters
that simulate a RAGE 128.
This is useful for developers who
are looking to try to test certain
behaviors of their application,
how their application responds
to different graphics devices
with different feature sets.
Okay, and we're not going to
use that right now either.
So let's go ahead and launch
the application we were
just looking at previously,
but launch it through
the OpenGL Profiler.
So there it is.
Now let's go look at some of the
other features of the Profiler.
So one of the features
is called the trace.
I'm going to suspend it here because
I don't want it to go too far.
The trace gives you a trace
view of all the OpenGL calls.
It gives you a time for each OpenGL call
and how long it took to execute.
And it'll also give you a call stack.
Now, to get the call stack,
I actually have to enable it.
Let me clear it.
Let's resume the application and suspend
it again just to get a small snapshot.
So what we see here then is
we see the same basic list.
And over in this window,
if I select the function,
I can see I get a call stack.
So every call that you make into
OpenGL will be tagged with time,
call stack, and the parameters it
used to call into OpenGL.
So this is useful for debugging,
getting you some feedback as
to how you're driving OpenGL.
One of the other features that this
allows is to post-process that data.
So what you can do is
you can run a script.
I've made a pre-made script
here called Condense.
I've loaded this condensed
as the current script.
Now I'm going to click the Filter button.
It's going to ask me for a--
- For a name for the file,
the Save It As, it goes off,
post-processes that data.
Now let me hide the profiler and we'll
hide Xcode so I can get to the file.
So opening that up,
what I did is I wrote a script
that generated a report.
This report tells me how-- a
summary of how I'm driving OpenGL.
So you can see that what it's
telling me is that you're
starting your frame with GL clear,
you're calling draw elements 239 times,
calling GL finish,
and then GL flush drawable.
So obviously,
one thing that pops out at me is,
didn't I just get done telling
people not to call GL finish?
So we're going to go
fix that in a minute.
So let's make OpenGL Profiler
the top application again.
So that's the trace window.
Let's look at some other windows here.
We saw the statistics window.
Let's resume.
Okay,
so here's what the new statistics looks
like after we removed the wait for VBL.
So we still see that draw elements
is the main time consumer.
Though we noticed the time spent in the
application has dropped from 70% down
to about 50%. So we've removed about 30,
or I'm sorry,
about 20% of the time that OpenGL is
consuming out of the application's time.
And
But draw elements remains the top item.
So one important number I'm
going to highlight again here is
this number down at the bottom.
This number here tells
you what percentage
OpenGL is taking out of your
application's process time.
So it's a good way to get
an idea of whether OpenGL is
your main performance culprit.
So if OpenGL is consuming
10% of your time,
you probably want to look
elsewhere for how to improve the
performance of your application.
If it's taking 20, 30, 40,
50% of your time,
it's something worth investigating.
So that's a good place to look
right away for an indicator of what
tools you ought to be going to.
Let's go down the list a little bit.
So let's open up a breakpoint window.
So what breakpoints do is allow us to
stop at any function call in OpenGL.
So let's pick the flush drawable call.
So we stop there.
You can see the application is paused.
It gives you a backtrace
where you stopped it.
If you click on this tab here,
it gives you the current OpenGL state.
So what you're able to do with
this is you are able to examine
your entire OpenGL state.
So what you're able to do with
this is you are able to examine
your entire OpenGL state.
So what you're able to do with
this is you are able to examine
your entire OpenGL state.
So let's, well, actually,
while we're at a breakpoint,
let's pull up the resource view here.
Now the resource view lets you
examine some of the resources
that OpenGL may have loaded.
For instance, we know we have the
OS 10 logo loaded here.
And we can see from the list
here that it's under an ID of 20.
We can see it's a rectangle
texture type RGBA,
size of 768 by 768.
So it'll give you a
list of your textures.
It'll also give you a
list of your programs.
So if you're using fragment programs,
vertex programs, you can also view those.
This demo doesn't actually have any,
so the list is empty.
So let's look at what else we have here.
So one other important item here
that's valuable is to check for errors.
If your application is
having some trouble,
sometimes what happens is that
your application is causing
OpenGL to throw an error.
And when OpenGL throws an error,
it ignores the function
that threw the error.
So it will not take effect.
The state change that it was supposed
to do to execute will not take effect.
So you can simply say break on error,
hit continue,
and the OpenGL Profiler will
watch for any errors in which your
application is throwing within OpenGL.
Another important feature here
is break on thread conflict.
What this does is OpenGL has
certain rules as far as how
threading should behave.
This will watch for any
violations of those rules.
When people use threading in OpenGL,
sometimes they get it wrong,
and that can cause a variety
of unpredictable results.
So this will watch for threading
conflicts and help you debug any
threading problems you may have.
We also have another item down
here called break on VAR error.
VAR,
standing for vertex array range error,
and that will watch for any time
you're trying to draw your geometry
and it happens to span outside of your
currently enabled vertex array range.
And the net effect of doing that when
you try to draw outside of your currently
defined vertex array range is that you're
not going to be able to see the error.
So this will watch for threading
conflicts and help you debug any
threading problems you may have.
You actually fall off the fast
path you're trying to enable,
and it falls onto the
immediate mode path.
The extension effectively gets disabled.
So it's good to know if
you're running into that case.
So, I'm going to leave that up,
and we're going to go look and
see what else we have here.
So, pixel formats.
A pixel format window tells you
what pixel format attributes
you passed into OpenGL at the
time you created the context.
Useful for reference.
So, let's talk about scripts.
OpenGL allows you to execute scripts.
You can basically add a script, write it,
let me call one, say, clear color,
and then I can go over here and say,
"GEO clear color." Let's say
I want the background to be red.
Okay.
Now, let's see here.
I got to get to a breakpoint
to actually execute scripts.
They will only be
executed at breakpoints.
Okay, so now we're at a breakpoint.
I'm going to say execute that script,
and I'm going to tell it to go
again here and see what happens.
So you can see that I overwrote
some of the OpenGL state.
And you can also see in the state
window that it told me I did that.
So anytime you modify state
from breakpoint to breakpoint,
the state window will
highlight in red the class,
the state that actually was modified.
So I can open it up and I can see that
I modified that clear color value.
So it will highlight state
changes between breakpoints.
Okay, so let's set it back to black
because red is kind of annoying.
Close that window.
Let's tell it continue.
Oops, I said to white.
We'll leave it white for now.
So what else do we want to look at?
Buffer views.
Another thing you can do at a
breakpoint is you can come up
and look at the back buffer,
the alpha buffer or the depth
buffer of your application.
So what this allows you to do is to
incrementally view the buffer contents.
So for instance,
if I wanted to incrementally
look at my back color buffer,
let's choose something
other than flush drawable.
Let's choose--
[Transcript missing]
Get to that.
Now, on the depth buffer view,
you can see the slider at the top.
What the slider does is helps you
analyze how many significant bits
you're using out of the depth buffer.
So what you do is you click
this magnifying glass.
The sliders will zoom in on the
number of significant bits out of
the total number of bits available
in the depth buffer and tell you
how many of those bits you're using.
So I can see that I'm only
using about 10 to 15% of the
precision of the depth buffer.
It's not very efficient.
I should be using more because I've
allocated that memory and I'm wasting it,
basically.
So let's go and do
some debugging on that.
Let's continue.
Let's quit the application.
I'm going to debug that problem of
not using all of the depth buffer.
Okay, so we, there's the GL finish.
While we're here,
why don't we comment out the GL finish.
And before this session,
I played around with a few values here.
And the call that actually sets
up your frustrum for determining
what your near and far clipping
plane is the GL frustrum call.
GL frustrum is also called
from a GLU perspective,
which is a utility function for setting
up your viewing projection matrix.
So I'm going to comment in
the one that I had set up.
And what that does is it changes this 10.
to a 1.2.
And what that does is moves
my near clipping plane out,
thus moving it nearer the object,
giving me a tighter range
of values around the actual
geometry that I'm drawing.
So let's save that.
Let's run the application.
So there's the application again.
Let's select flush drawable.
Oops, sorry,
I've got to attach to the application.
So let's attach this time.
Scroll down, find the application,
attach to it.
And there we are.
We stopped at this breakpoint.
So let's see here.
I stopped at a point that it's
not going to be available.
Let's do this.
I'm actually going to
change the way I did that.
So let's do that again.
Okay,
now let's go look at the depth buffer.
Okay, so now we can see from
the previous settings,
it's all red.
Red telling me that the current range
of this slider is outside the bounds
for which defines the entire region.
So let's click on the magnifying glass.
So now we can see that we're using about
90% of the precision of the depth buffer.
So this is just a simple tool to help
people analyze how effectively you're
using the precision of the depth buffer.
So let's move on.
Now, we saw a little bit
with the Driver Monitor.
I'm going to explain a little
bit more about the parameters
of the Driver Monitor.
So the Driver Monitor, again,
is querying values directly out
of the graphics kernel driver.
So these values get
exported up to this tool,
and they allow you to monitor a
variety of parameters from the driver.
So to talk a little bit about some
of the parameters you can look at,
you can look at things like
current free video memory.
So if I want to look
current free video memory,
I select that item,
I drag it down into the list,
and now I can see what the values are.
So let me change the color on this to,
let's say, blue.
So I can see what the values are.
So I can see that on
this graphics device,
I have something over 200 megabytes
available of video memory at this moment.
Other things I can examine
are data throughput.
So, for example, I can look at...
Let's scroll down.
Optical context.
So, yeah, so you can look at command
buffer data for DVD.
You can look at OpenGL command data.
And command data is any data that
goes through the command buffers.
There's several different
ways of transporting data up
to the graphics processor.
One is command buffers,
another is data buffers.
So let's look at data buffers,
because we tend to try to sneak a
lot of things into data buffers.
But let's just see how
they're being used right now.
Let's change that color to yellow.
So we don't see a lot there, do we?
Let's deselect a few
of these others here.
Okay,
so let's look at OpenGL command data
and see if the data that we're sending
through here right now is going
through the command data channel.
And there, sure enough, there it is.
So what we're seeing,
looking at the green line there,
we're seeing something over a half a
gigabyte a second of data going through
the command buffer channel in OpenGL.
So that's where the bulk
of our data is going.
So, I need a case.
You can look at these
different parameters.
If you mouse over them,
they will give you a description.
Okay.
And let you analyze
OpenGL in a variety of ways.
So let's hide that application.
Okay.
So let's -- I think
we've done enough there.
Let's switch back to the slides.
Okay, let's talk a little bit about
what we were just seeing there
and how we're going to further
improve that application.
So when we look a little bit about,
look a little bit at the
OpenGL pipeline when we're
talking about vertex throughput,
the OpenGL pipeline can make copies
of the data at various stages.
When you're using a media mode,
what you'll see is that the
application hands the data in,
we have to copy it off into a
current vertex data structure,
and then we copy it out of the current
vertex structure into the command buffer.
So you end up with your copy of the data,
and then OpenGL will make two copies.
So a better way of doing
it is use vertex arrays.
Vertex arrays optimizes around
the current vertex state,
right?
So we don't have to
maintain that in OpenGL.
And what happens is you
hand us an array of data,
we take the data directly
out of that array,
and we copy it directly into
a command buffer to transport
across to the graphics device.
So this is a fairly decent optimization,
and this is actually
what my demo is using.
It's using draw elements,
which is a vertex array data path.
So let's talk about
some basics here then.
So what you want to do when you're
optimizing data throughput is you
want to eliminate data conversions.
Some data types you can pass into
OpenGL are not necessarily natively
supported by the graphics device.
So some basic data types you probably
want to stick to are GL float,
GL short, and unsigned byte.
Those tend to be reasonably
well-supported across
the different products.
You want to minimize your
function call overhead,
and there's several ways to do that.
One is to use draw arrays.
Obviously,
what you want to do is to minimize the
number of times you're calling to OpenGL,
so you're going to want to maximize
the size of the array that you're
passing to OpenGL at each call.
The more data you pass us,
the less time we're going to be
spending handshaking with you.
You can also use the CGL macros.
The macros is a way to reduce
the per-function call overhead.
I'm not going to get
into it too much here,
but one thing you ought to keep in mind,
if you're making a lot of OpenGL calls,
you can reduce that function call
overhead by using the CGL macros.
And another thing to keep in mind
is that the graphics processors
are becoming programmable.
So what that allows you to
do is to consider offloading
some of the computational
work onto the graphics device.
So for instance, in previous years,
this exact demo in fact,
I wrote a vertex program that offloaded
the work onto the graphics processor
for actually calculating the wave.
Now it depends on what
you want to achieve,
what effect you're doing,
or what performance profile
you're trying to optimize for.
But in some cases,
offloading the computational
work to the graphics processor
can give you quite a benefit.
So, talked a little bit about
the extensions already,
but for vertex data, again,
our vertex buffer object is a
useful extension for you to look at.
It is primarily designed to give you
a high bandwidth path for uploading
data into the graphics processor.
Static data,
you'll want to treat slightly
differently as far as where
you want the data to live.
Dynaptic data, you probably want the data
to reside in system memory
where the CPU can talk to it.
For static data,
it's ideal to tell OpenGL that
it's static and that we can
pick it up and move it in video
memory and leave it there,
thereby using the internal memory
bandwidth of the graphics device,
not having then to transport
it across the bus every frame.
There's two ways to get
static data into video memory.
One is using the static type
qualifier for a vertex buffer object,
or you can just give the data to us in a
display list and we try to post-process
the data and store it up in video memory
without any direct interaction by you.
Other than just wrapping your
calls with the display list.
So with that,
now let's go back to the demo one
machine and see if we can use that
extension to optimize our performance.
So here's the application as we left it.
For comparison's sake,
we see we're running
at 120 frames a second.
We can see down here at the
bottom the CPU is working
really hard to make that happen.
We're consuming about 100% of
one of the CPUs at this point.
If we take a shark profile and
take a look at what it's doing,
again, we're spending about 45% of
the time calculating the wave.
We're spending then a bunch
of time down here in OpenGL.
We see two items down
here in OpenGL taking
approximately 30% of the time.
You know,
about 30-35% of the time spending
in these top items in OpenGL.
So, let's see what we can do to
reduce OpenGL's overhead.
So, let me quit this app here.
Now what I've done is coded up the use of
the arb vertex buffer object extension.
So moving over from straight vertex
arrays to our vertex buffer object is
actually relatively straightforward.
So I've got two pieces of code here.
The first one is going to represent
the items I have to turn on,
and this is the items
I'm going to turn off.
So there's various places I'm going
to comment code out and a couple
places I'm going to comment code in.
So the first thing I need to do is
I need to bind to a vertex buffer object.
It's an object semantic,
just like a texture.
So you need to create an object,
and you create an object
by binding to a new object.
So I'm going to bind to an
object that gives it a name and
something I can switch to when
I want to draw from that object.
Now, the remaining two calls,
when you use a vertex buffer object,
the meaning of vertex pointer changes.
It changes from being a
memory address to an offset.
That's important to remember,
because you may already
be using vertex arrays,
and if you don't modify the
parameters to vertex arrays,
you'll find that things
don't work as expected.
And the reason that it's done this
way is that the memory is contained
within the vertex buffer object.
You're no longer going to
be passing arrays to OpenGL.
You're just telling OpenGL the
offset into your object at which
you want to pull the data from.
OK?
So I'm going to comment
those two lines in,
and I'm going to comment out
the two old lines that are no
longer using the correct syntax.
So let's go down.
Now, I've created the object right
up here with the bind buffer.
I've set the offsets of where the
data's going to live in the object.
And now down here,
once I've loaded the data-- see here,
I'm calculating the initial wave
values-- the initial values.
And now I'm ready to
give this data to OpenGL.
And the way you can initially give data
to OpenGL is called GL Buffer data.
And GL Buffer data then will
take the pointers you give it and
copy the data into the object.
So it's not going to retain
a pointer to that memory.
It's going to copy the data
into the buffer object.
Let's see what else we have to do.
OK.
So now when we calculate
the way of every frame,
What we need to do is we need to bind
to the object because we're going to
have to modify the data in the object.
So I want to make that object current.
Now,
since the data lives in the object now,
it doesn't live in my space.
The object, the data actually is
part of OpenGL's state,
and it lives in OpenGL's memory space.
I'm going to have to
retrieve that memory,
so I do that by calling mapBufferArb.
What that does, it tells OpenGL,
go give me a pointer
to your object memory,
and I need to modify it.
So I call mapBufferArb,
and it returns the pointer.
So now I've got to comment out
my old code I had here that set
the pointer to something else,
because that's no longer valid.
I'm no longer in charge of the memory.
Now, anytime you call map buffer,
you need to un-map it.
OpenGL R buffer objects require you
to bound your access to the data.
Before you access it, you call map,
and when you're done accessing the data,
you call un-map.
So, here I am calculating the wave,
and I've got various alt-evec commands
in there to try to do it fast.
So down at the bottom
of this whole thing,
I've got the UNMAP.
So now that I've filled
in my wave calculation,
which I will be executing every frame,
I need to call UNMAP to tell
OpenGL that I'm done accessing the data.
So now I've done the initialization,
I've done the bounding of the
dynamically modifying the data.
Now I gotta go modify,
have to go modify the data,
how I'm going to draw the data.
So here in the wave display function,
I have the, again,
the bind to the object.
I want to make sure the object's
current before I draw to it.
And that's it.
Everything else is the same.
I'm going to issue the draw
elements command as I did before.
And everything should just work.
So let's close this
window and give it a try.
So remember before we were using
a hundred percent of the CPU,
we were at a hundred and
twenty frames a second.
So let's see what difference this makes.
So we're at 140 frames a second.
And it turns out that I actually
throttled this at 140 frames a second.
And the CPU behavior,
I'm not quite using 100% of the CPU.
I'm using something that looks like
maybe 80%. So let's take a shark trace
of that and see what it looks like.
So the wave calculation's
still up there pretty high.
But the other items of
OpenGL have changed.
Now all of a sudden I'm seeing
this 15% spent in an idle loop,
just like I had before.
Whereas before I was seeing
about 30%, but now all of a
sudden this is showing back up.
So I'm going to talk a little bit
more about this in detail later,
but what happens is that when you are
sharing data with a graphics processor,
which vertex array range,
R buffer object, texture range do,
they are talking to the same
memory region that the graphics
processor is accessing.
You are synchronizing with
the graphics processor,
and you have to be
careful how you do that.
So what this is,
is this is telling me that I'm
potentially hitting a blocking
spot where the CPU is waiting
for the graphics processor.
So let's go see if that is true.
Let's open up the Driver Monitor,
which is the ideal tool for analyzing.
And let's again look at
the CPU wait for GPU time.
And sure enough,
it looks like I'm spending
about 15% of my CPU time waiting
for the graphics processor,
just like Shark told me.
So this tool's confirmed it,
so let's go dig in deeper and find
out where that time's being spent.
Well, just like before,
I figured it out before,
so we're not going to waste that time,
but I'm spending time in
CPU wait for user code.
And that's a pretty interesting
parameter to be moving around in.
I'm going to go ahead and do
a little bit of monitoring,
because that parameter tells me
that a blocking point that the
developer has put in their code is
what's blocking OpenGL's execution.
And that can happen from a
fence command or a map command.
Now remember, we call glmapbufferr before
we go modify the data.
So this actually is where the time
will show up in the Driver Monitor if
I'm spending time in any routine.
That is a fencing type
routine in the OpenGL API.
And again, those are going to be
the glmapbuffer calls,
or they're going to be the fence calls.
Those are the two calls that will start
attributing time to this parameter.
So what this is telling me is
that the graphics processor
is slowing down the CPU some.
In other words, I'm ready to go off and
start modifying the data,
but the graphics processor hasn't
quite gotten done displaying it.
So I'm stalling the CPU a little bit,
waiting for the graphics
processor to consume the data,
before I can go and
touch it with the CPU.
So we'll talk a little bit more later,
but keep that in mind.
Now, as a last little experiment here,
let's just again open the Profiler
and let's pull up the statistics.
And we have to attach
to this application.
And let me clear the
stats to get a fresh view.
So what's interesting is that now
the top call is the map buffer.
And that's also consistent with what
we saw in Shark and the Driver Monitor,
where we believe that map
buffer is a stalling routine.
It's stalling,
waiting for the graphics processor.
So all those pieces of
information are consistent.
And again, we'll talk about that
more in a little bit.
So I'm going to clean up here a little.
[Transcript missing]
Slides on the screen, please.
There we go.
Okay, so let's review a little bit.
So we were using vertex arrays,
then we wanted to go off and start
using some OpenGL extensions.
And what we did is we used our
vertex buffer object to try to
optimize the data throughput.
We saw that we got some performance.
We started using less CPU.
So optimize both CPU and performance.
And what it looks like when we
start using that extension is
that the data gets pulled directly
from the application's memory.
So we have a space directly to the CPU.
There's no copies being
made of the data by the CPU.
The data is being pulled directly
by the graphics processor.
CPU is not spending time
doing copying of data.
Okay, so let's look at the code,
summary of the code here.
So, as we showed before,
we always have to do a bind
before we are going to access
or operate on a buffer object.
We enable the vertex array state,
we set up the pointers,
the vertex array pointer,
but we set it up as an offset,
not as a pointer.
We call the buffer data to
initialize the object with some data,
and then we call map buffer if
we're going to modify the data.
So we call map buffer,
we get the data pointer back,
we fill in the data, and then we unmap.
Just like we did in the code.
So again, static data,
you want to tell OpenGL if it's static.
Now, static, you're not going to want to
be modifying it every frame,
but if you modify it once in a while,
it's okay,
but it primarily needs to be static data.
So if you're only modifying
it every fifth or tenth frame,
put it up in video memory,
let the graphics processor
use its internal bus instead
of transferring it across the
graphics device bus every time.
And again, displayless,
you can get static data and put
it into video memory by wrapping
it with a displayless calls.
You can put that data in begin, end,
and we'll parse through the data,
pull it out,
and put it up into video memory.
So I want to show you one more thing
on the Vertex Performance Demo.
So let's see here.
What are we going to do?
So one thing I want to
show you was what happens.
We can see that we're
using about 80% of the CPU.
And we saw that we were consuming
or stalling about 15% of the time.
And Shark was showing that as well.
So let's modify this
application one more time.
And let's take out the throttling
of the 140 frames a second.
Let's see what these profiles
show us once we do that.
So, what I'm going to do, oops,
wrong file here.
So what I'm going to do is I'm going
to go down to the timer that I have.
I'm going to increase this
from 140 frames a second.
Let's increase it to 180 and let's see
what this looks like in the profiles.
Because right now I'm kind of
artificially limiting the performance.
First off, let's see if it can keep up.
So it turns out that it
doesn't get a whole lot faster.
So we're pretty much hitting
the limit of this system here.
We can look at the blocking behavior.
As we were looking at before,
we were spending about
15% of the time blocked,
but now we're spending over
20% of the time blocked,
the CPU being blocked against
the graphics processor.
So what I'm doing is I'm
driving the system harder,
but it didn't get all that much faster,
but I'm spending approximately
7% more time blocked against
the graphics processor.
So I'm driving it harder,
but I'm not getting that much faster.
So this is kind of the point here is
that you have to make your architecture
behave in a way that it's asynchronous
with the graphics processor.
If you drive the system in such a
way that you're running synchronous,
you can drive it as hard as you want,
and all you're going to do is block
harder against the graphics processor.
So let's also look at Shark,
and let's see if Shark is
consistent with that data that the
OpenGL Driver Monitor is giving us.
It's telling us about 15%,
which looks a little low,
but not all that different than what
the Driver Monitor is telling us.
So, okay,
let's switch back slides and we'll
get into more about asynchronous
behavior here in a minute.
So texture uploads,
let's talk about that for a while.
So just like vertices,
texture uploads have the
same kind of behavior,
where the OpenGL framework will
make copies of the data through the
various parts of the OpenGL pipeline.
One copy could be in
the OpenGL framework,
one could be in the driver,
and another copy could be
resided up in video memory.
Now these copies, obviously,
to make a copy, to save a memory copy
somewhere in the pipeline,
there is a copy of the
data being performed,
either by the CPU or
the graphics processor,
physically copying the data
and depositing it somewhere.
So everywhere we see an arrow,
basically the data is being moved.
Everywhere we see a cylinder there,
the data is being deposited.
So there's memory being consumed.
So let's go to another demo
that I'm going to show you
about texture performance.
Switch back to demo one, please.
Thank you.
OK, so we're going to run a
completely different demo here.
So let me just run it as it is.
So the first thing you'll see here is
you'll see my boss's head popping off.
He's in the audience,
so this may be my last day.
But let's say we have a bad
prank we're doing at work and
we want it to run really well.
Sorry.
What I'm seeing here is that
I'm using a lot of CPU time.
I'm getting about 46 frames per second.
My application's actually trying
to get 60 frames a second.
So I know that somehow I'm being limited
by the performance of my application,
and I'd like it to run smoother.
So we're going to run through the
same basic steps we did before.
And what we're going to do
is we're going to run Shark.
We're going to take a trace.
So we take a trace for
about five seconds.
And we look and we see the top item,
65% of the time is
being spent in memcopy.
So we know we're copying
a lot of data around,
and that's something
we would like to avoid.
So let's also look at
the OpenGL Profiler,
and let's attach to this application
Okay, so let's attach to it and
let's open up the stats view.
Hit clear to get a nice
fresh trace of this.
So the OpenGL Profiler is telling me that
98% of the application's time is
being spent in GL text SUBMG2D.
And the shark is telling me that
65% of the application time is
being spent just doing mem copy,
probably happening underneath
the text image SUBMG2D call.
So we know that we're moving a lot of
data and it's happening in that call.
So let's go back to the slides and let's
talk about some extensions we can use to
try to to eliminate copies of the texture
data as it goes through the pipeline.
So, first some basics.
So, the goal, again,
is to eliminate CPU copies
and conversions.
The way you do this is
you use the right formats.
The right formats are going to be
key because what you want is you
want a pixel format that is natively
supported by the graphics device.
If it's not natively supported
by the graphics device,
we're going to have to convert it to
a format that is natively supported.
So, here's some formats that
are common on our platform,
supported by all of our chips.
There's other formats that are out there.
You'll have to experiment
to see which ones work best,
or you can email us and ask whether
a format is optimal for the system
or the graphics device you're using.
So, texture extensions.
So, to optimize the texture throughput,
some extensions you want to keep in
mind are the Apple Client Storage.
The Client Storage extension,
what it does is it retains a
pointer to the texture data.
It does not make a copy of it.
So, what OpenGL does is it hangs
onto a pointer of the data,
and now the application's responsible for
making sure that the data is retained.
It stays around.
You can't throw it away while
OpenGL has a pointer to it.
So, that extension has the benefit that
the framework will not make a copy of
that data anymore once you use that.
Apple Texture Range.
It has the benefit of the
Texture Range is it will bypass
the copy made by the driver.
It has two modes, shared and cached.
Shared and cached are similar
to static and dynamic.
Cached is static,
meaning cached up video memory.
Shared, meaning put it down as system
memory because I'm going
to share it with the GPU.
And EXT Texture Range.
Texture Range can be an
important extension because
some hardware will require that
extension for doing direct DMA.
It has a more compatible format with
the data as it resides in system memory.
So, the Texture Range extension is
useful to ensure optimal performance.
So, let's look at what each one
of these does in this diagram.
So, before I showed cylinders,
now we have the images of my boss.
So, the Texture Range extension
gives an image to OpenGL.
Now, if I use Client Storage,
I'm bypassing the framework's
copy going directly to the driver.
So, I've eliminated one copy of the data.
And then,
if I'm using the data as cached,
it's going to be cached up video memory.
The data gets copied up video
memory and used from there.
So,
I've eliminated one copy down to three.
So what does the client
storage app look like?
It's one line.
It's the PixelStore Eye Unpacked
Client Storage Apple.
Just setting that to true when
you bind to your texture object
will enable this extension.
Just one line of code.
So, texture range and rectangle texture,
what does that do?
So those bypass the
copy that the framework,
I'm sorry, that the driver is making.
So now I've bypassed the graphics
driver's copy of the data.
So now it's pulling directly
from the OpenGL framework,
directly DMAing it into video memory.
So now I've bypassed the driver's copy.
And what does that look like?
Also, one line of code.
You just call GL_TEXT_PARAM_I rectangle
texture target type.
And in this case,
I'm calling the texture storage hint,
which is the extension parameter.
And I'm calling storage cache.
So I'm going to cache
it up in video memory.
So combining these extensions,
the behavior I get is that the pixel
data that is stored up in the application
will be DMHed directly into video memory.
No copies made by OpenGL.
Zero CPU copies.
And putting all that code together then,
what it looks like is you
bind to the texture object,
you call the texture param i
to set up the client storage.
Actually, in this case,
you call the rectangle
texture extension first.
Then you call the pixel storei,
which is the client storage.
Those are the two lines you add
to enable these two extensions.
And then you load your texture.
You call your GL text image
2D call to load the image.
So let's talk a little bit
about the blocking behavior
I was pointing out before.
When you are using some
of these extensions,
again, you are sharing data with
the graphics processor.
The application and the graphics
processor are pointing to the
same data out in system memory.
So when you do that,
there is synchronization involved.
You have two asynchronous devices
trying to talk to one region of memory.
They need to be synchronized.
And you need to make sure when you're
synchronizing those that you do it in a
way that you're not blocking each other.
So for instance,
if I was to only use one object,
one vertex buffer object, for say,
or in the case of textures,
one texture range,
and every time I went to talk to the CPU,
I would call a fence to block
before I access the data.
And what would happen is the
CPU would block until the graphics
processor is completed using it.
The CPU would operate on it.
And then the graphics
CPU would operate on it.
And then I would draw with it,
and the GPU would pull it up.
So this is what this
block diagram looks like,
right?
The CPU operates.
I flush, get it.
It's processed up to
the graphics processor.
Graphics processor
completes its processing,
lets the CPU go.
And they're basically
operating in serial,
right?
But if I double buffer my data,
I can have a copy that the graphics
processor is operating on and the
CPU you're operating on in parallel.
So it's important to double buffer
your data when you're using these
types of extensions to make sure
that the graphics processor and
the CPU are operating in parallel,
not serial.
That's a key aspect of when you're
using these optimal extensions,
because you're sharing.
data with a graphic processor.
So, texture range synchronization,
I mentioned a little bit.
For texture range,
the synchronization extension
is the Apple Fence extension.
You'll need to use that any time you
want to go and access the data which
the graphics processor is pointing to.
So let's look at what that means.
So just like with our
vertex buffer object,
we had to call a map.
The map was a synchronization
point for the vertex extension.
The finish object with a GL texture
type is the synchronization call
that you'll need to call before
accessing vertex array range,
or a texture range data, okay?
You call that before you
access the texture data,
and that will make sure that the CPU does
not access the data before the graphics
processor is completed accessing it.
Okay, so let's go back and take some
of these extensions now and apply
them to this demo and see what
performance improvement that does.
So the first things to note are
that the CPU is at about 100%,
the performance of our demo is
at about 742 megabytes a second,
42 frames a second.
Just note those so that when we change
things we can compare those back.
Okay,
so let's open up my source code here.
Now I'm going to scroll down
to where I load my textures,
down at the bottom.
And like I said in the slides,
there's two lines of code.
There's line one and line two.
I'm just going to add those two
lines of code and see what behavior
change that gives my application.
So the text param i, I added that line,
and the GL pixel store i.
OK.
So let's run it.
So now you can see I'm
achieving my 60 frames a second.
You can also see that my CPU burden
has gone down substantially.
So not only am I achieving frame rate,
but I'm freeing up
quite a bit of the CPU.
I'm consuming less power for portables.
I'm freeing up CPU for doing
other types of processing.
And I'm achieving higher performance.
So let's go through and
take our samples again,
just to take a look at
what Shark looks like now.
So,
we're spending 37% of our time blocking.
That's pretty interesting.
It's interesting because
this is actually on a timer,
and the timer is firing
at 60 frames a second.
The rest of the time,
my application is just blocked.
So if I was to modify my application
to fire at a much higher rate,
the time that would be
blocked would go down.
But this is actually,
if you learn to recognize
what Shark is telling you,
this is actually a really
important symbol to recognize
the ML set interrupts enabled,
simply because that tells me
that somewhere I'm blocking,
and then it becomes a process
of analyzing where that blocking
behavior is coming from.
So now, in the OpenGL Profiler,
let's go ahead and once again
attach to this application...
Look at my stats again just
to see how I'm looking.
So,
what I see is that I used to be spending
97% of my time in GL text sub-image 2D.
That has dropped down to
0.04% of the application time.
So I'm hardly spending any time there.
And GL flush drawable
has become the top item.
Not a bad place to be.
I've gone down from 97% of
the application time being
spent in OpenGL down to 30%.
So let's go back to slides.
OK, so that's basically all
I had to talk about.
For more information,
there are these sample code
up on the WWDC 2005 website.
And TechPubs has a number of documents
up there that have been updated
for Tiger for you to review that
give good information about OpenGL.
So I encourage you to go up there
and look at that website for any of
the follow-on information you may
be looking for after these sessions.
I also encourage you to look
at the OpenGL org website.
It's the website maintained
for the OpenGL organization.
It has a number of links
and interesting articles,
documents,
and developer events that are happening.
Events after this session.
An important one is we're
going to be in a lab,
in the Tiger Lab,
right after this session.
So anybody that has a question
about anything we've talked
about or about your application,
they can come there.
Myself and a number of OpenGL engineers
will be there to answer your questions.
And tomorrow at 9 o'clock,
we're having also a drop-in lab where you
can come by and talk to OpenGL engineers.
So, who to contact?
If you need to contact somebody at Apple,
you can contact myself,
Stauffer@apple.com, or Travis Brown.
Travis is very helpful for going
out and a good person to contact.
So, we're going to go into
questions and answers right now.